# herculens_nnls
Implementation of non-negative least squares (NNLS) for strong lensing modeling by Herculens

## Why
The herculens is a great SL modeling tool. However, due to the usage of numpyro and gradient-based sampling methods such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) require amplitudes as non-linear sampling parameters, they do not implement the non-negative least squares (NNLS) for solving the amplitudes. This introduce a lot of extra parameters, especially when using the multi-gaussian expansion (MGE) to model the source light. 

Therefore, we implement the NNLS into the code to reduce the number of non-linear parameters. Currently, we support the several sampling methods, including optax, MCMC by emcee, and nautilus.  
Optax is a deterministic sampler based on gradient descend similar to a neural network. This sampler can provide the point estimate for the parameters of lens model. The parameters can serve as an initial for the MCMC or nautilus sampler.

The optax, emcee, and nautilus samplers all use JAX to accelerate the sampling speed. Note that the emcee and nautilus run on GPU natively, and we only implement the NNLS in JAX for fast likelihood creation. While optax can be fully built to JAX, which provides extremely fast sampling. 

## Usage

### Simulation
`run_sim_sl.py` contains the simulation framework from the [tutorial](https://github.com/Herculens/herculens_workspace/blob/main/notebooks/herculens__Complex_source_and_point_source_modeling.ipynb) of herculens. 

## Modeling

Optax:  
``Python
python run_herculens.py --pixel_scale=0.08 --sampler=optax --gpus=6 --num_steps_optax=30_000 --num_chains_optax=8 --save_path=optax_run
``

emcee:  
``Python
python run_herculens.py --pixel_scale=0.08 --sampler=emcee --n_burn_emcee=1000 --n_steps_emcee=3000 --gpus=6 --save_path=emcee_run
``

nautilus:  
``Python
python run_herculens.py --pixel_scale=0.08 --sampler=nautilus --n_live_nautilus=1000 --gpus=6 --save_path=nautilus_run
``

The NNLS is default, and can be disabled by `--use_nnls=False`.  
Utilize the initial parameters from optax, append `--init_params_path=optax_run/kwargs_result.json`  

Other configurations can be found in `herculens_nnls/configuration.py`

## Acknowledgement
These scripts are mostly generated by AI IDE [Cursor](https://cursor.com/home), and modified manully. 